Hey there, welcome to the Paws at Data Science Hangout. I'm Libby Herron, and this is a recording
of our weekly community call that happens every Thursday at 12 p.m. U.S. Eastern Time.
If you are not joining us live, you miss out on the amazing chat that's going on. So find
the link in the description where you can add our call to your calendar and come hang
out with the most supportive, friendly, and funny data community you'll ever experience.
Can't wait to see you there. Now I'm really excited to announce our featured leader today
and introduce you to Cat Hicks, psychologist for software teams at Catharsis Consulting.
Cat, thank you so much for joining me. It's nice to see you.
It's a pleasure. It's not every day you get to talk to an audience that's in and around
the tools that you use every day, so I love that. I work with a lot of developers and
their relationships to their tools, so it's really fun to bring it into my world a little
bit here.
Wonderful. Well, I would love it if you could introduce yourself. Tell us a little bit about
what you do, but also things that you like to do outside of work.
Well, someone already noticed that I have a harp. It is an Irish lever harp. I've played
that since I was 15. This is actually the same harp that I got from my mom, who very
generously answered her 15-year-old who came up and said, I have to play harp. I can't
explain why, but I just love it, and I need you to buy me this really expensive instrument
that nobody plays, and she did. So that's something that I love. I love to write outside
of work. I'm a huge fiction writer and reader. In work, I consider myself a research architect.
I'm a social scientist by training. I have a PhD in quantitative psychology. I also did
a postdoc in computer science and engineering in a design lab, so HCI, kind of human factors
stuff, which is a really great place to get into people's relationships with their tools.
But very quickly, from even when I was back in academia, I cared a lot about what was
happening for people in the real world, in their workplaces, in the classrooms, and so
I found myself always pulled towards applied social science, towards doing research projects
that I felt put some answers to questions that everyone was kind of asking, but no one
was really getting answers to. So in my latest work, I try to do that especially for software
developers. So questions like, how can we help software teams thrive? How can we understand
their problem solving? How do we break apart old myths about actually how our problem solving
works? Because there's a lot of myths and misconceptions out there. So I'm very interested
in our networks of beliefs that we hold about how our own minds operate, and also in intervention
science. So I've led and built research departments from zero to actually producing an impactful
research agenda, carved out a research department at a company that didn't have one, and have
kind of been really interested in the whole logistical side of, how do we get good research
structures in place that empower scientists to do creative and good work? That's kind of a
really big overview. We can take this in a lot of directions, I'm sure.
Yes, we totally can. And I would love to ask some sort of like context building questions,
so that we all have a good foundation for figuring out what questions we want to ask you. So my sort
of thing I need help understanding is like, okay, we did the PhD, we moved into some industry roles,
and then we did consulting, you decided to like found some stuff, do things on your own.
What does catharsis consulting help with? Like, what are some of the facets of work within software
teams? Like, is it like, do you help with interpersonal stuff, setting boundaries? Is
this much more oriented towards the tool and user and, you know, relationship?
Yeah. So it's interesting what people assume psychology is and does in the world,
because there's a huge, huge discipline with lots and lots of different ways of going about it. I
like to tell people I'm not a couch psychologist. I don't do one on one work. I'm not even necessarily
a feelings psychologist. I'm really much more of a structures of beliefs and behavioral science
and team practices psychologist. So with catharsis, I built this research consultancy,
I would say, six years ago now or something like this. And honestly, people will tell you
these stories like, oh, yes, I knew since I was a child, you know, that I would do this.
I did not have that vision or clarity. What I knew was that everybody kept asking me these
questions about doing research or evaluating evidence that I thought were sort of obvious,
you know, so I was not to insult anybody, but, you know, you don't know what you know sometimes. And
I share that just because I think it might be useful for this audience. It took me a long time
to realize the tremendous source of value that research methods and evidence science had in the
world. So with catharsis, I design evidence science with organizations that's shifted over
the years. So I've shifted to focus much more comprehensively on engineering organizations,
software organizations. And in part, that's because for the last three years, I was also the VP of
research for a tech company where I built a research lab that did open science for software
teams. So I was able to kind of understand what I even thought about software teams, build an
evidence base on which I can now say, now I know what I want to consult on and what kind of
interesting and helpful practices I can offer to engineering orgs. So that might look like things
like a developer experience team at an engineering company is really excited to try to improve the
lives of 2000 people and they've gotten budget and they've gotten support from their leaders.
And now they have to face the hard work, you know, of picking tools for these people, asking,
do we know what actually helps these folks that we're building for? And so these folks might come
to me and say, Kat, can you help us design a real world comparison, a real world efficacy study,
or even some consulting on the basics of how are we thinking about metrics in our environment?
Are we falling into a lot of common pitfalls? That's something I've done some work on as well.
There's a lot of misuse, I think, of people's activity data and work data. And I'm really
interested in helping prevent some of that misuse. That's a fascinating topic. We've had
so many wonderful people in the people analytics space on the Data Science Hangout recently. And
that's always a big question around metrics. Like they are fraught. If you're looking for
productivity or happiness, or you're trying to predict attrition or whatever, gosh, human beings
are complicated. Well, we have so many wonderful questions already in Slido. I would love to jump
over and look at some of those. But really quickly, before we get started, I forgot to say that Kat
is giving a keynote at the POSIT conference. Like, hello, that's a really big deal. We're really
excited about it. Kat, could you give us a little preview of what you hope to talk about in your
keynote? Yeah. My keynote is about the psychology of technologists. So I'm writing a book right now
that's trying to translate big, important ideas from psychology and from what we know about
our core psychological needs at work and bring it a little bit into the workplace of knowledge
workers. So I hope to puncture some of the misconceptions that y'all probably have had
to encounter in your lives. And also, you know, I said the simplest thing I like to say is I hope
this will be a book that practitioners will pick up and want to give to their boss and say, hey,
you know, please consider this. And in it, there's an interweaving of, you know, rich empirical
science, but also a lot of the lived experience of practitioners. So questions like, what helps us
feel creative? What creates a culture where we can build coalitions in our workplaces rather than
start to devolve into, you know, in-group, out-group? And, you know, what kind of
beliefs about technical workers, again, are sort of holding us back? So questions like,
you know, are happier people actually productive? My answer to that is usually yes. So we'll cover
in that keynote, I think, how I've tried to set out a research agenda and do open science for
technology teams, which I think is a bold new frontier that needs a lot more investment in it.
Yeah, and I'm really happy with what we're going to talk about on stage. So come to the conference.
I'm excited too. I mean, I think a lot of people here work in a development capacity,
even if we're not software developers, in a data science development capacity. And
it feels really comforting to know that there's somebody out there who's sort of looking out for
us and has our backs and who understands, like, the things that we might be struggling with.
And we have a lot of people here who are in people leadership roles, so I'm sure they're
looking forward to that too. I wanted to share in the chat Kat's newsletter. So if you're interested
in, like, hearing from Kat and when the book comes out, maybe you'll hear something that way,
you can go check out fightforthehuman.com. I put that in the chat. But let's hop over
to Slido, where we already have lots of questions and people have been voting.
Okay, so we are going to jump right into an AI question with Mike. Mike,
would you like to ask your question?
Mike, can you hear me okay?
Yes.
So the answer to this question isn't, well, it's not specifically about AI, but,
and the answer might be, oh, come to the keynote. But the question was something like,
there are a lot of teams going through change, you know, whether that's increasing use of open
source or embracing AI tools and that kind of thing. Do you have any tips on how to objectively
assess whether, you know, how that change is going and the kind of comfort level within teams?
Can you tell me what you mean when you say objectively assess?
Well, it seems that I kind of lead a group, right? And I see big groups undergoing this change.
And a lot of times, you kind of get the people who actively hate something will tell you it.
People who love something, you can tell they love it because they're quiet and they're
diligently getting on with the new thing. There's a kind of bit in the middle and it's hard to
assess the overall feeling of, you know, is this going well? Do I need to engage more or are the
bulk of people more or less happy with this? Okay. Okay. So it sounds like there's two
questions here. Let me know if you think I'm wrong about this. One is, let's talk about evaluating
AI. Second is, let's talk about how sometimes we're unevenly sampling from our environment,
from the people we want to understand. How do I make sure I'm like comprehensively evaluating
people's experiences about AI? Something like that. Okay. I see you nodding.
Well, I think actually the thing I'm more leaning towards the second bit.
Okay. Okay. Cool. Let's start with that. Yeah.
Because that's like a precondition for the next question, right? So I care a ton about this.
There's a chapter in my book, which I haven't written yet, but I'm excited to write it,
called Designing an Organization That Wants to Understand Itself. And I think it's a huge
freaking question. So I'm just like right off the bat going to say we're not going to answer all of
it. But like, if you're struggling with this, Mike, send me an email because I just, I care about this.
I'm trying to understand it myself. I think we can all think about places and orgs that have
truly cared about trying to get our insight. And that feels really different, right? Than
the HR engagement survey that comes to you and you're like, I don't, what's going to happen?
You know, is my, right? Am I going to get in trouble? Am I going to? So the advice I give
when I'm doing evidence strategy work with leaders like you is maybe the biggest thing you can start
to do is create buy-in from people to trust that your evidence gathering moment is actually a good
one. And this is a big thing that social scientists care about. We care about research design, but we
actually deeply care about sampling and selection. And have I created a situation in which the
information is actually even going to be given to me and that I'm clearing out of people's way the
very understandable, sometimes strategic, important to them reasons that they would give
me inaccurate information. So a classic example of this is good information travels a lot faster
in organizations than bad information. Of course it does because there's like this huge freaking
cost all the time. Like you're even just, you have to, if you're a brave person, who's going to bring
up the bad news, you still have to think about it more than you have to think about the good
information. So when you think about that moment of data collection in your organization, what have
you done to right up front create trust for people to tell you about their AI experiences? What have
you also done if there's somebody needs to make it worth their while, they don't care about AI,
they don't care about the decision you care about, what do they care about? So I frequently advise
leaders that we need to actually have like a holistic evidence, like data gathering strategy,
you know, particularly in my case with the developers they might be working with.
Stop asking them, like there's five managers and they're each asking five different things and it's
kind of disjointed. We actually have to come together, form a coalitional evidence research
strategy. AI is a pretty good wedge in for this because everybody's kind of freaked out about it.
But then say, let's do some co-design. I've done this a lot, this has been really successful.
Ask the developers, what do you all care about? We'll have a space on the survey or a space on
the thing for this and like those kind of combinations will often elicit the engagement
from the sort of middle of the road people or the disengaged people. I don't know if this is a
good enough answer for you, it's a high level answer, but that question of creating engagement
is something where we have behavioral mechanisms we can pull on and we don't have to pull on them
in a manipulative way. Like I tell people completely straight up, I know that some of you
find these surveys annoying. I know you might, you know, wonder what we're going to do with it. So I'm
going to tell you exactly my plan. I'm going to tell you I got your leadership to actually commit.
If we find things in this direction, we're going to do X. If we find things in this direction,
we're going to do Y. And then you can have people who are all over the spectrum,
like horse race, betting on their outcome, feeling engaged, and what you've done is created that
org that's interested in understanding itself, right? And another little tip I'll say is
leaders do not, they really underestimate how much people are curious about themselves
and how much people actually want something that feeds back to them. So we in my scrappy little
research lab got incredible participation from public developers who were getting no money from
our research, nothing, you know, and they participated in it in part because in every
research project we baked in that we were going to send them some like scientific guidance to
help them in their careers, and they were going to get it immediately, like as an email right after
they finished the survey. And, you know, we were out there a little bit like intimidated. These
are people with really sky-high salaries, very, you know, we can't really offer them an amount
of money that's going to make sense to them. Are they going to care about our little guidebook,
you know, about overcoming anxiety? Boy, they did, you know? So if you can offer that care somehow,
you know, you will become the person who really has the superpower to unlock engagement.
This is wonderful. Thank you. I think that the way you said about, you know, like,
let me tell you what I'm going to do with this information if it goes this way or that way,
is sort of the heart of a data scientist's conversation that they have with stakeholders.
Like, okay, you want this thing. If I make you this thing and it tells you this, what are you
going to do with that to kind of get to the heart of what they actually need? So I think if somebody
came to me as a data scientist and said, I'm going to turn that back to you and give you that same
power and that buy-in to whatever is happening, I would feel so respected.
And I think that this is good. It ties in with community building for me to give people
the ownership. I agree. There's a lot of current, like, current intervention science
really emphasizes interventions are done with people, not on people. This is like a classic
quote. Like, you just can't control other people. And if you try, you're in the land of being a
surveillance asshole or something, pardon my, but, you know, you're in a completely different land.
And like, we, you know, I have seen the world of software can be very acrimonious. I mean,
people yell at me all the time, you know, and yet you can, no, it's, it's, you know,
it's my cross to bear, but, but you can still really change people by creating, by saying,
we're going to, we're going to respect each other. We're going to, we may violently disagree about
how we should measure progress and software, but let us try to respect each other. Let us
break down the disagreement, you know, and it, it really does go far. Thank you so much. I feel like
this is like, this is truly a cathartic situation. And it's so funny that your company's called
catharsis. That was part of the thinking. Yeah. Yeah. All right. Well, thank you so much, Mike,
for that wonderful question. And I have a few questions here that I can choose from. I really
liked Yulia's question when it popped up, so I would love it if she could unmute and ask hers.
Can I find Yulia to help her unmute? Hi. Yes.
Yeah. So my question relates to, we're all, most of our steps are embedded in teams that
are embedded in bigger organizations. And I'm really curious about how much of this developer
thriving comes from your immediate team versus the larger organization, because sometimes you have an
kick-ass team and a kind of iffy organization or a kind of so-so team, but a really cool organization.
Yeah. Yeah. This is a very impossible to answer question, but I'm going to tell you what I think
is interesting about it. And maybe it's just going to be like more questions you could ask
to try to assess your particular answer. It depends on how much the organization affects
the team, right? So there's an interaction there that's really important to pay attention to.
So I would think if I was giving advice to my little brother or something,
probably knowing nothing else, I would say, pick the good team, I guess. However, make sure there
aren't enormous things you need in life safety career that are gated on the organization.
So for instance, organization gated decisions tend to be how much you get paid or
certain career opportunities that are very important and maybe more or less important,
depending on the relative power you bring into the org. However, the team is like,
who talks to you every day? And so that is visually immediately constant psychological
feedback, psychological environment. And they really are not terribly separate. So like,
how much could a good team really persist in a super bad org? My questions would be,
what makes the org bad? Like, in what way do we see it being bad? Is it bad in the
normal way that large collections of people can be very frustrating? Or is it bad in that
it's creating very negative incentive cycles that are eventually going to degrade and make
your otherwise good team kind of resilient, not resilient, make them fragile and break down?
So these are like really deep, hard questions to answer. That's the way I would start to
scope my answer to that question.
That is really tough. Yulia, thank you for that amazing question.
This is something, if I can chime in, that I over the years of my life have noticed is that
sometimes a red flag for me when I'm interviewing at a company and I'm talking to other people who
work there is if anyone says, well, you know, your experience really depends on the team you're on.
If you're on a good team or a bad team, and I'm like, wait, hold on. That's not a great feeling
for me because, you know, teams change and leadership changes and things move around. So
if you join someplace that, you know, you could very quickly be on a different team that's not
as good, it worries me. Yeah. It is a sign of potentially a lack of accountability in the
culture, maybe an uneasy culture or an unstable culture. And you got to think about, well,
what's going on in this? Or, you know, two pieces of advice I would give, which are at opposite ends
to any person in their career. One is just mindfulness about you have people outside of
your work that you can talk to who will really honestly tell you, you know, this place is
affecting you in a way that's over the line. Like you got to get out of there and whether that
wherever that's coming from. I think that we all need that feedback sometimes. The second part is
developing your macroeconomic sense. Actually, I find a lot of technologists and like bless you
all, but, you know, as someone who's had to be a VP of research and do budget and argue in front
of boards and talk to the CEO, you know, a lot of folks really check out from the larger economic
forces that are determining the possibilities their organization can see. And some of that can
just a little bit of that can be really helpful. Like if you're at a place that's fundamentally
in its economics, not going to invest in innovation, you're going to be facing a lot
of headwinds every time you're that person who's trying to get people excited about doing a new
technological approach. Maybe you need to think about the industry, the place you're in, the larger
forces that, you know, you're just one person and these are like large market forces that we
all have to contend with. So that's also a piece of my advice. Awesome. Thank you. All right, let's
head over to Slido and find another amazing question. There was one that has a ton of votes.
It's an anonymous question. Whoever asked this, hi, thanks for asking your question. It says,
I work in a remote multidisciplinary team where colleagues don't really understand each other's
roles and interactions often feel transactional. So what strategies can help foster psychological
safety by improving understanding and empathy in such a team and help bring that team together?
I really like this question. I like this question too. I've been in this place. I was going to say,
I've been there too. Yeah. And I'd love to hear other people chime off as they, you know,
or answer this in the chat too. I mean, I think that developing, you can develop your little
strategy, your little test balloons for whether or not people are going to pick up your bid
for increasing the team culture. And they might not, you know, but there's a concept in relational.
I just said I wasn't a couch psychologist, but I do love clinical psych. I like to learn from
those people. There's a concept in like relationship psychology of making a bid for attention
and how we make these conversational bids all the time. And we might say, hey, you know, look,
I saw that cool bird, you know, and if somebody, if somebody answers your bid, it's kind of like
an, an improv skit, right? They were like, oh, cool. All right. They, yes. And you, you know,
and really part of the information that's being conveyed is we're allowed to take a moment and
have shared attention. You're not just an object to me. Like I care about your perspective. I'm
going to, I'm going to stand side by side with you. You know, people reject bids and that feels
like social rejection, right? Because it is social rejection. You get into a meeting and you say,
you share something a little vulnerable about your day or how hard you're working. And people
are like, yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay. Agenda item two, you know, you were receiving like an implicit
message that that's not what we do here. So that's important information. Like it might be accurate
information that people will not receive your bid. However, it also could be, they feel like stuck on
the other side of this plane of glass of like, no one wants me to waste time. I had a manager
one time in my first tech job, which was at Google, which was really scary for me, you know,
and I presented all this stuff to very high level people. And my manager gave me this feedback that
was like, not a compliment where she said, Kat, you really don't care what title somebody has.
Like if you're talking about data and evidence, you just, you just treat everybody the same.
And I was like, yeah, you know, because that's a great thing about me. And she was like, no,
it's not a great thing about you actually that we want, we don't want that here.
But I remember she, I got feedback one time that I spent too long saying thank you for a compliment
that somebody gave me, you know, that kind of thing was just, okay, we have to be transactional
here. This is, you know, I don't have the room to create a different culture. However, I've moved
on from there, you know, and I think there are a lot of times in cultures where we might try to
tell other people, again, I'm trying to do something a little different. Or even like,
do you guys ever feel like we never get to know each other as people? And a way in I find that's
often really fun is through talking about the process of work. So rather than jumping just
straight into tell me how you feel, which might be very scary for people and put them a little
on the spot, you could you could be a little bit like, hey, I want to do you want to do like a
retro about our communication or our collaboration, or how we find creativity in this work, like a
little bit of a toward the psychological safety, but you know, through the lens of work, which
people often find like less challenging and a little more like, oh, you know, you can also
bring up shared values that has a huge impact on people bringing up, you know, because we all love
to learn, like, because, you know, I know, this team wants to have a good learning culture.
I'd love to learn from you, I'd love to, you know, and kind of do a little bit of modeling that
you want something that's not transactional. I hope that helps us some tips.
I mean, it helps me. I didn't ask the question. But I feel like I just got a lot of answers that
I have been looking for. I really, I get that same feedback, Kat, I've been told,
you don't seem to see hierarchy, you just talk to people like they're people. And I'm like,
are they not people? I'm pretty sure they're people. We're just all human beings, right?
I do get intimidated by people still. I am still nervous if there's somebody that I'm a big fan of.
I'm a big fan of yours. I was nervous talking to you today. But we're all people. All right,
anonymous question asker, that was an amazing question. Thank you for asking it. Let's go find
another great question. I wanted to touch on Marcos's question, because it talks about one of
your recent podcasts. And I think it's a great topic. Marcos, if you're available to unmute,
could you ask your question? I'm here. Hey, there I am. I got, we actually exchanged a blue sky
interaction about your podcast, which is my claim to fame for today. But yeah, I similarly, I mean,
it seems like you had a visceral reaction to this paper. And not just from your podcast,
but the social media posts, you know, Macedon and I'm blue sky. And I let myself be a little
bit of a demon for a minute. Yeah, I am no stranger to this. I famously get triggered,
especially about astrology things. And I wrote a whole, a whole blog post about some four year old
like news article recently. But anyway, is there another like, this one clearly triggered you and
you wanted to get nine of triggers by the word, but clearly got you excited. And you want to get
kind of the truth out there. And has this happened to you before? Has there been like,
in the last few years, has there been another kind of weird, maybe about psychology, or maybe
about something else that you're like, Oh, this is people are not interpreting this paper, right?
Like, I need to get out, need to get the truth out about this.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Thank you. This is an interesting framing for this question,
too. Like, I appreciate that you brought in some context of how my work, I, I, um,
I try to strategically pick when I do this, I don't know if I've 100% figured it out,
because I think you can't just be a crank all day long, you know, then you're not producing anything.
And and also, it makes you a depressed person, I think it's bad for you. But, you know, I was
joking with one of my friends that this was like crank summer for me. I'm like, you know what,
I'm in a transition phase right now in my work, I just want to be like little cranky demon
a little bit. An example that comes to mind is there is you probably all heard it, there's a
really pervasive idea, trope, myth, phrase that people use where they talk about 10x developers,
or 10x engineers, or you know, 10x whatever. I, this comes from a number of places, but there's
like a particular 1968 case study where like, the estimate the like, where did I was asking myself,
where did this 10x like come from? Besides the fact that it just sounds good, it's nice to say
10 or something. It's a round number. I think it came from this 1968 case study. Because it's
quoted in a really influential book, a book in software that's been really influential called
The Mythical Man Month, which was by Fred Brooks. It's really uncritically quoted.
I like have a personal vendetta against this 1968 paper. I think it's so dumb. I, you know,
I think it was just overextended. You know, it's a really strange little lab task. And it makes the
extremely sweeping quite like generalizations. And it essentially says, wow, people who do
programming are going to be really expensive. So we should find the few people in the world who
are going to be good at it. It uses like the time people took to complete the task as its measure of
whether people are good at programming or not, which is like a very simplistic measure. Like
people can take the same amount of time to solve something and be solving it with completely
different strategies. And so you could have a good or a bad outcome look the same in the numbers.
And also, you know, it just does bad math. So like it doesn't account for the idea of individual
variance, which is something I'm really interested in as I have a background in learning.
So I got to like explore this paper a couple of times. I actually talk about it in my book.
I got to give a talk about it to a software audience and sort of talk about myths about
cognition. And it was super gratifying and fun because so many people sent me private little
messages that were like, this stuff always made me feel really, really bad, you know.
And I was always, you know, or even I had a bully in my workplace who used this kind of I'm a 10x
developer and you're not, you know, thing against me. So that was like very emotionally gratifying
to me. And it was also like a little bit of extending empowerment to people. Like, listen,
you're a smart person. You get to read science. You don't have to like, you know, the 1960s,
we thought all kinds of bananas things in the 1960s. You know, we didn't let women into college
in that year in a lot of places. So that was a very fun conversation for me.
This whole conversation is fun for me. I really enjoy talking about this stuff. So I'm going to
go check out that podcast. Marcos did share it in the chat, if anybody's who's interested.
I will say, sorry Libby, I'll just say too, I've actually explicitly done some work on the kind of
cultures, like what I call contest cultures and brilliance beliefs and technology teams. And that
might be of a lot of interest to some of y'all given the shape of things that are coming up.
I think more work needs to be done. I have an observational study on this that I really like,
and I'm really interested in it. So that's my AI skill threat paper, actually.
Okay, cool. Yeah, we'll have to go find a link. All right, cool. Awesome. Marcos,
thank you for the question. We have about 20 minutes left and lots, lots more questions.
We are not going to be able to answer all of them, but hopefully we can transfer this
conversation to social media, continue talking about some of these things on Blue Sky and LinkedIn.
So let me hop over to Slido here and see if I can find another good question.
Bear with me as I read through some questions here.
Jeremy has a question. Jeremy, are you available to unmute and ask that?
I will highlight it here in Slido for us.
Oops. Yep, I'm here.
Yes. So I'm also a former applied psychologist turned engineer. So I particularly was interested
in your paper on developer thriving, because I used to study group information processing,
group decision making. And in kind of classic group decision making literature, there's these
hidden profiles that kind of emerge when we have information spread across team members,
but not everybody kind of shares what they know. So the group ends up making a worse decision than
any one person could have. And so it's kind of this common problem that emerges in a lot of
these contexts. And so I was really interested in that visibility component you mentioned.
So I was wondering if you looked at any maybe interventions that maybe explicitly scaffold
kind of information exchange, maybe like rotating like a data or something.
God, I wish I had been able to.
Yeah. And like, let's talk sometime if you ever, because I'm actively
piloting and thinking about interventions within the constraints of what I have money to do right
now and stuff like that. But I think that software and technologists more generally, technical teams
need this kind of work. It's a great question. Dev thriving project was really scrappy,
really observational. I think we acknowledge it in the small IEEE software paper that we
ultimately published with it, but we're kind of like, look, we need to help developing more items.
I was really proud of it as like planting a flag, like more things matter for developers and for
their productivity than some of what we talk about. But I think there's a thousand questions
provoked by this and a thousand points in which these psychological models need to be brought in.
So I'll just say some things that might be relevant here about information exchange.
One thing that we did was we looked at code review anxiety, which is, of course,
an internal problem for people and their experience, but it's also an information
exchange problem inside of an organization. And I make that connection because, you know,
we see people engage in avoidance behaviors, like they check out of a code review. They're not going
to bring up the hard thing. They're not. They're wondering who their interlocutor is. You know,
they may be. So there's a lot of information exchange and dyadic group level questions
in that area. So we have built out like a tiny plank, like a little foundation simply by saying,
well, here's an empirical and empirically tested model for code review anxiety,
which was important to us to get out. And this is a published paper with
empirical software engineering. You might like it. It's an intervention study.
Our excellent lead author, Carol Lee, who's a clinical psychologist, led that intervention.
But it wasn't specifically looking at group effects or dyad effects, although I believe
group effects happened because of it and because of things like making the psychological needs of
the exchange more visible. We also have a toolkit paper follow up. We sent people home with a
toolkit. There's that engagement I was talking about. And they used it in their actual workplaces,
code reviews, and reported back to us, at least a lot of positive effects and interesting stories.
So there's like lots to build on. Like, I hope group researchers like you maybe someday find a
path inward to help. We always talked about wanting to do dyadic pairs or something like that,
bring in a developer and their manager, you know, like that kind of thing is I'm really interested
in. But this is just throwing a lot at you. But yeah. No, that's great. I mean, even this sparks
ideas. I mean, I'm even thinking like, even like in those code reviews, like one major thing that's
missing that might even help with some of that anxiety is just like, we rarely see the intent
of the person who's right. So I mean, being understood before going into that review.
Yeah, totally. And we thought we focused on kind of like the thinking traps and the cognitive
distortions that might be happening for the individual, right, where they're sort of like,
if I mess up in a code review, I will, I will get fired. I mean, I it's just the most wonderful
quotes in this study as well. Like I remember one person said, like, panic voice in my head
screaming, you know, like that's the level. But the other side of the story is super interesting.
And something I'm interested in as well is what you probably know this, like what we call like
intra group, not just inter group, but like how group members are themselves talking about the
norms of the group and say, and sort of working out, this is who we are here. And this is what
we're doing here. And also, I don't know if you know, like the normative dissent model from
Dominic Packer. Yeah, so I Jeremy, we got to talk.
I think all of this is really interesting for teams and has like rarely been studied with
specifically in the context of technical teams. And it's like really helpful for us. Yeah,
yeah, we should definitely talk. This is very, very excited. Yeah, this is great.
All right, you two need to get together afterwards. Jeremy, thank you so much for asking your question.
And Mike had asked in the chat, like, hey, is there a link to that? I did put a link in there.
And I will I will share that one more time. This is a link to the code review anxiety paper called
understanding and effectively mitigating code review anxiety and then also the code review
anxiety workbook that was mentioned. I should just say to Carol Lee is on the job market right now
she is incredible. So. Awesome. Wonderful. All right. Let's head over to the other question
that I really, really liked when it popped up inside of our sentences question.
Our sentence, are you available to ask life? Yeah, thanks, Libby. Hi. So and thank you for
joining us today. I'm really, really cool discussion. My question is maybe a little bit
kind of a little bit broader, not so specific, but it's about organizations in general. And the
question is, are there ways that organizations can balance the approach to creating culture between
like a top down approach and a bottom up approach, which, you know, can really change team
dynamics and even intra team or inter team dynamics within the organization? So, yeah,
wondering if you might if you have some. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, boy. So, you know, I think that.
When I think about organizations that I feel are have unlocked, you know, because they understand
how people work and they're not treating people like little robots or something and getting into
the common pitfalls of organizations, I think about places that recognize what leaders actually have
power over and what is actually within the remit of leaders and and also what is best appropriate
to be bottom up. And I often find we flip those like we do. I mean, at least in my world, this
might be different in the context of y'all's industries or companies, but in the world of
the engineering orgs I work with, boy, they love top down tool mandates. I mean, come on. This is
you have like the world's most, you know, people who love what they do. People are very passionate
about exploring new technologies, people who are like they're so they're so invested in it. They're
testing new tools in their evenings and weekends, you know, and then you're not seeing that as a
source of information like you're just you're and maybe they're I mean, I work with a lot of
platform engineering and infrastructure, DevEx teams where someone really does care really,
really hard about the experience of these people. But then they're elevated to a position in the
org where they're told to become a decision maker in that top down mandate. And then they're not
given any tools or time or budget to do like maybe user research with their own population.
I find that absurd and also like very low hanging fruit for a leader to fix, actually. So I think
about the information loops organizations are leaving on the ground, you know, that could inform
and make it not so much a top down mandate, but actually like a solution to the to the need that
your organization has been voicing to you, you know, and we can't like meet everybody or I'm
not a fan of satisfaction measures for this reason, because I think you can get tyranny of the majority,
you know, and I think we need better practices of understanding what our technical people are
truly doing and finding and figuring out and working. And this is also a place where the on
the bottom up side, if you know, we've all experienced this, if you are in an organization
that truly has a learning culture, and is like valuing and celebrating teams, sharing and like
powering each other up, this is what I call a cumulative culture. And that is a place that
will be more innovative, constantly. But it's really scary and hard to let people do that,
because it looks worse before it looks better, you know, because it looks like people make a lot
of mistakes, it looks like chasing a lot of dead ends. This is in the nature of innovation, like
culture level scholars who compare innovation patterns across societies tell us this, you have
to let people jitter and, and pursue lots of solutions, and then kind of get to the one that
wins out. And you have to allow that process to happen. I think we're bad at allowing that process
to happen. It's a big question. So I have big answers. But that's one, I think, I think also,
like just taking stock of like the really easy wins in the environment around this, like,
where is the top where has the leadership blown up people's trust with some mandate that was
bad for them. And I often work with teams that want to make the cost visible to their leaders,
the cost of like a failed initiative visible to their leaders, orgs that can do a little bit of
repair against like creating that organization that wants to understand itself, orgs that can
say we did kind of mess up with how we did this, boy, they get a huge amount of credit,
graciousness, patience from their people, simply by having that collective humility,
which is a concept I find really, really important for organizations as well.
Yeah, there's that we could do a whole session on this.
We totally could. And that sort of humility in the face of mistakes or learning opportunities
is something I actually look for when I interview people. So one of my interview questions is often
like, tell me about a time you really messed up and you had to tell a bunch of people about it.
Because if they are like, I've never done that. I'm like, well, maybe that's not a great thing.
Tell me about, you know, the power that you can find in admitting mistakes and stuff,
because there's a lot there. I'll tell you, too. I mean, you know,
I've been a VP. I've been like a high level VP of research. You know, I've been the only woman
in the room a lot of the time. Leaders are people like and leaders are caught up in a lot of
unhealthy status games. I'm not saying this. I'm just saying this in general, like, you know,
and there's a lot of psychology going on there to how we who we allow to succeed and who we allow
to become leaders. So, you know, I think that can be really frustrating, scary and hard, but
we all have some power to to elevate people around us and think, are the am I letting the
compassionate people get promoted as data scientists in my org? I mean, leaders come from
our technical worlds and it was very hard for me to become a leader, you know, really hard.
So y'all can make it easier by valuing more diverse people.
Awesome. Thank you. All right. We have time for at least one more question.
And, Joey, I really enjoyed your question. I think it's going to send us in a positive
direction if you're available to unmute and ask that. I love it.
Yeah. Hey, Kat. Thanks for hanging out with us. I just for context, I'm like a mid senior
individual contributor and I work in the federal government. So I'm wondering if you can speak to
what staff at my level can do. So I don't have a lot of real power. I'm matrixed into a lot of
parts of the org, but I don't have a lot of formal I'm not a senior leader. I don't have a lot of
formal authority. What can staff at my level do to like so positive seeds into a culture that has
really been through a lot? I mean, morale is like pretty low. I think it's fair to say everyone's
like it's a weird culture. Everyone's been through a whole lot. But, you know, I want to
help. Everyone wants to help. I don't have a lot of real power. So can you just like speak into
that? This is bringing tears to my eyes. You know, I have a friend at NOAA. I have friends at the NSF.
Like, this is a really hard time. I think about the wisdom that comes to us from communities
that have had to create their own safety in circumstances we could hardly imagine. So
you know, there's a theory I like called the stereotype inoculation theory. I think it's by
Das Gupta. And it's about how you're the only minority in an organization that is an experience
of extreme threat all the time, you know, and like bias all the time. However, you know, she explored
what happens for people where they form their own little group and how that can inoculate you
against some of the damage and against the feeling of what they're telling me is who I am.
Because it's really, really hard for us to not internalize that stuff. I mean, it may sound
really obvious, but you know, we do internalize. It changes our view of ourselves to being an
environment that's dysfunctional. So I think about protection. Where does protection come from?
And we do have incredible mechanisms that we use. And these are often where people who are
capable of that cultural change comes from. There's another area I look into about reaffirmation,
like affirming the self, like self-affirmation is sort of a psych buzzword in like pop airport
books. But it's actually like a really beautiful concept. And the concept actually means can you
firm up yourself, you know, in a space, in a world that's so difficult, in like all the insults
and injuries of human life. And there are ways, you know, one way is accessing support outside.
But people can do this to themselves. So you can dialogue with yourself. Actually,
this is where a lot of talk therapy helps you do this. Journaling helps people to do this,
because you can kind of firm up the self and say, you know, am I replicating the message of the
environment to myself? Or do I know I have something higher, transcendent, really meaningful?
No matter what storm is on the surface of this ocean, I have that certainty and no one can touch
it because, you know, they're not at that level with me. You know, I can't do a clinical session
here, but that's the, those are the directions I would like look at, go into, think about,
take inspiration from, try to bring to my colleagues. You know, I have friends who have
navigated scary, scary situations. And a lot of navigating that and protecting yourself comes back
to who am I talking to right now? How can we be good to each other right now? This 10 minutes of
coffee, this 15 minutes where I say I'm not transactional with you. Like, I really care
about your soul and your well-being. Look, organizations, institutions shift. My, you know,
my ancestors were immigrants who had to leave behind huge identities for themselves, completely
remake their identities, you know, and just knowing that there is a legacy, actually, there's a legacy
we can learn from around all of this. So, you know, maybe kind of making your identity not so
much about being a federal worker, but about being something else, something that's more lasting and
more powerful and bigger than an institution that might be failing you right now. That's kind of
some thoughts. And we're just, we're here to, you know, I care about you. So.
That was extremely helpful. I just want to say thank you for that.
Thank you, Joey, for that wonderful question. Well, we have one minute left and I, we might go
a minute over. I'm so sorry if anybody needs to jump, feel free to jump. Kat, thank you so much.
I wanted to see if I could fit in one more quick question because there was an anonymous question
that basically said like, hey, I take on these long-term high-impact projects and people who
are involved in my projects see my impact, my value, but across the wider company, I might be
seen as unproductive because my work is not visible. So are there any tips on how to get
noticed without being performative? And I love this question because I feel the same way.
Y'all be performative. Okay. I'm sorry. Like performance is here for a reason. I don't mean
not be yourself. Find your own way. I mean, I, sorry, I'm reacting because I have worked with
so many highly conscientious people who get pulled into this sort of situation. And there is a funny
effect in psychology, like really high efficacy people, people who are incredibly good at solving
hard to solve things, sometimes trap themselves in less productive routes because they're so high
self-efficacy. Sorry. And I'm sorry if this is, I hope it's not sounding harsh. I hope this is
coming with like big sister energy in a way, which I try to bring to my team. But like, listen,
you can have a goal of being the most conscientious person who's cleaning up
everybody's stuff at the org. That could be your goal. And you, if that's your goal,
you should decide what matters to you besides explicit recognition, because you won't ever get
it. And it, and that is a choice that some people I respect truly make. And they decide I'm in a care
role and this is what I'm going to do. And it's never quite going to be understood.
And understanding and support is going to come from outside of my job. And it's going to come
from a community of peers. It's going to come from joining an infrastructure community where
we all get to talk about. And I'm, you know, however, however, I am an ambitious person
and I want to see more people like us succeed. So I encourage those of us who can do this or
want to do this to get strategic about performing. This is a game where there are rules that you can
learn and you can learn how to make this kind of work more visible. And that's actually some of
what I've worked on. I've worked with nonprofits to say, I know you all have this rich, beautiful,
incredible health intervention workshops you're doing in the community. And it's impossible to
distill it down into dollars saved. I don't care. Like I care about you to go do your work,
but in this room that we're going to have with the city council, we must come in with dollars.
We must, you know, and making it a strategic game that we can win a weapon that they can use
learning those skills. It's not something we should be ashamed of. It's not something that
takes away from the authenticity of our work. Maybe it's something where you need to find a
partner who's really good at it. Like I considered myself as a VP of research. Part of my job was
being a scientist that then the whole big part of my job was, you know, being, um, being this
person who was scrapping and fighting for budget all the time and saying our research work really
connects to ROI really connects to values. Oh, and final tip, make the cost visible constantly,
like constantly say you are not doing this thing. You should I'm saving you millions of dollars.
Here's exactly what would happen if I stopped doing this work. Here's what would happen if I
stopped doing this work. And I advise people to, you know, not do the shrinking violet.
I guess I kind of did this thing and it was super helpful. And in your, you know,
actually that you helped like thousands of people or whatever extraordinary thing you did,
you know, backing away from that is a disservice to like all the young people who are going to come
after you. Right. So that's how I think about it. Fantastic advice. Oh, my gosh, this is so good.
Rachel and I actually in our one on one started implementing a brag document where we write down
things that wouldn't have happened if we hadn't done them, which has been really helpful every
week for me to think about everybody. Thank you for joining us. Thank you for staying a few minutes
late with Kat and I and Rachel. This was a whole lot of fun. Kat, thank you so much. A pleasure.
I look forward to the conference. Oh, yes. OK. Everybody look forward to Kat's keynote.
Go find her on LinkedIn. Go find her on Blue Sky. Follow her newsletter. And when this gets
on to YouTube, there will be all the resources linked in that YouTube description. So all of
the things that we shared here, paper, podcast, all of that stuff. And if you are looking for
them, you could also, you know, drop me a comment somewhere on LinkedIn. I'll send them to you.
Thank you, everybody, for coming. If you are interested in saving the chat where all of these
great resources kind of got pasted in, there's little three dots that lets you top right of
the chat that allow you to save the chat. Keep it forever. Thank you for joining us. We will see you.
Reminder, we do have a summer break for the next two weeks. I just want to make sure we
say that. I'll put it in the waiting room. So just in case you join again
next week, you'll see that, too. Yes. And the registration process, if there have been any
problems, you know, let us know. Let us know if you've hit any. Oh, Ozan just said I thought
this started at 1 p.m. Eastern. No, it starts at noon. Ozan, we missed you for today. But we'll see
you in a few weeks. Next two weeks are off for the July 4th holidays. And then we have Ross
Roche. So excited to talk with Ross. And I really look forward to seeing you all again. Bye,
everybody. Bye, everybody. Nice to see you. Thank you so much, Kat.